you
I'm going to start with a challenge I
want you to imagine each of these two
scenes in as much detail as you can see
number one they gave us a hearty welcome
well who are the people who are giving a
hearty welcome what are they wearing
what are they drinking okay
scene two they gave us a cordial
reception how are these people standing
what expressions are on their faces what
are they wearing and drinking fix these
pictures in your mind's eye and then jot
down a sentence or two to describe them
we'll come back to them later now on to
our story in the year 400 C II the Celts
in Britain were ruled by Romans this had
one benefit for the Celts the Romans
protected them from the barbarian saxon
tribes of northern europe but then the
roman empire began to crumble and the
Romans withdrew from Britain with the
Romans gone the Germanic tribes Angles
Saxons Jutes
and Friesians quickly sailed across the
water did away with the Celts and formed
kingdoms in the British Isles for
several centuries these tribes lived in
Britain and their Germanic language
Anglo Saxon became the common language
what we call Old English although modern
English speakers may think Old English
sounds like a different language if you
look and listen closely you'll find many
words that are recognizable for example
here's what the Lord's Prayer looks like
in Old English at first glance it may
look unfamiliar but update the spelling
a bit and you'll see many common English
words so the centuries passed with
Britain's happily speaking Old English
but in the 700s a series of Viking
invasions began which continued until a
treaty split the island in half on one
side where the Saxons on the other side
were the Danes who spoke a language
called Old Norse a Saxons fell in love
with their cute Danish neighbors and
marriages blurred the boundaries Old
Norse mixed with Old English
and many Old Norse words like freckle
leg root skin and want are still a part
of our language 300 years later in 1066
the Norman Conquest brought war again to
the British Isles the Normans were
Vikings
who had settled in France they'd
abandoned the Viking language and
culture in favor of a French lifestyle
but they still fought like Vikings they
placed a Norman King on the English
throne and for three centuries French
was the language of the British royalty
Society in Britain came to have two
levels french-speaking
aristocracy and old english-speaking
peasants the French also brought many
Roman Catholic clergymen with them who
added Latin words to the mix Old English
adapted and grew as thousands of words
flowed in many having to do with
government law and aristocracy words
like council marriage sovereign govern
damage and Parliament as the language
expanded English speakers quickly
realized what to do if they wanted to
sound sophisticated they would use words
that had come from French or Latin
anglo-saxon words seemed so plain like
the anglo-saxon peasants who spoke them
let's go back to the two sentences you
thought about earlier when you pictured
the hearty welcome did you see an earthy
scene with relatives hugging and talking
loudly were they drinking beer were they
wearing lumberjack shirts and jeans and
what about the cordial reception I bet
you pictured a far more classy and
refined crowd Blazers and skirts wine
and caviar
why is this how is it that phrases that
are considered just about synonymous by
the dictionary can evoke such different
pictures and feelings hardy and welcome
are both Saxon words cordial and
reception come from French the
connotation of nobility and authority
has persisted around words of French
origin and the connotation of peasantry
real people salt of the earth has
persisted around Saxon words even if you
never heard this history before the
memory of it persists in the feelings
evoked by the
words you speak on some level it's a
story you already knew because whether
we realize it consciously or only
subconsciously our history lives in the
words we speak and here